all right I'm here with David Deutsch
David thank you for joining me
thank you for having me good afternoon
good afternoon indeed so I want to talk
about the universal Constructor which is
a theoretical machine that can cause any
physical transformation that can
possibly be caused now why is
understanding the universal Constructor
important to understanding the nature of
reality rather than it being merely in
engineering curiosity
yes it's more than just a curiosity by
the way the idea of the universal
Constructor is basically ancient it's
it's like began with the idea and
Antiquity of cornucopia
which is a thing that produced an
endless supply of whatever food you
would like delicious food
but then pretty soon people began to
think about a machine that could produce
anything you like and this has been
explored in science fiction and so on
and so I don't think it's just a
curiosity engineering wise it would be a
dramatic and important innovation but
you ask about what is its connection
with fundamental physics it is basically
a generalization of the idea of
universal computation and Universal
computation as conceived of by Babbage
and Lovelace and then by touring is
really the only way to understand what
computation actually is
a non-universal theory of computation
wouldn't be a theory of computation at
all that that would be just a theory of
engineering
so the theory of of universal
computation which I then sort of brought
into the quantum era by developing the
theory of the universal quantum computer
is the assertion that such a thing can
exist
is an assertion about the laws of
physics the laws of physics are such
that there is a single machine that can
mimic
the computational power of any other
machine to arbitrary accuracy and all
that you have to give it
is fast hardware and memory now
the universal Constructor comes in here
because that universality
is not the only one that could exist and
in fact I think it is is not the only
one that does exist there's also the
question of not just performing any
computation but performing any
transformation of physical objects and
not if given enough memory and so on but
if given only knowledge
because if there's something you have to
give it other than knowledge which it
itself couldn't provide
then it's not Universal
so it has a similar but different logic
from a universal computer and its
relationship with physics is a
generalization of that of the universal
computer
now you wrote in the foundational paper
on Constructor theory that the possible
existence of a universal Constructor
might be proved from independently
motivated constructed theoretic
principles now I know it's still early
but I wonder have you made any progress
of if not the proof itself but what that
proof might look like since the
Constructor Theory program began
uh yes I have in fact I have been
struggling to complete a paper on the
universal Constructor from from within
Constructor Theory and I think I have a
proof but it is rather cumbersome and
clunky and parts of it are not
intuitively compelling so I'm as I say
I've been struggling with trying to
complete that paper for some time now
but I have done enough to convince
myself
that to put this in a mathematical way
it is a theorem of Constructor theory
that the universal Constructor exists
that is a machine which can be
programmed to perform any transformation
that any other machine can be programmed
to perform
let's say
hypothetically if this proof doesn't pan
out or if it turned out as you were
working towards this proof that such a
machine is possible that it turned out
that actually a universal Constructor is
impossible to build what might that tell
us about the laws of physics now I
understand it sort of depends on why the
proof doesn't work but I wonder if you
have right so but I wonder if you have
any thoughts for example might it tell
us that the principle of
interoperability is false or something
along those lines yes so as you say it
what it would tell us depends on what
exactly would go wrong and what would
seem to be irreparable in the in the
proof
uh I think whatever it is
that went wrong
it would be interesting it would tell us
that there isn't after all
the apparent connection between
understanding the world and controlling
it
that there appears to be
so it could be that that if there is no
machine that can be given just knowledge
to then perform any Transformer any
given transformation then
well you know I I I can't quite imagine
exactly what it would imply but
if there is something that can't that
you can't program a machine to build
then that really means that there is
something that can't be built
and if there's something that can exist
but can't be built
then that means that there's a well it
might mean that there's a resource
in nature
that is finite
and not replenishable
not just a resource like a negative
entropy but a resource like let's say
a monopole a magnetic monopole we think
there aren't any but suppose that we're
wrong about that and suppose that there
is exactly one magnetic monopole
then that would mean that any machine
that included a magnetic monopole in its
design
essentially so that it couldn't perform
its function without the magnetic
monopole then that would mean that that
particular machine could perform a task
that no other machine can perform
and you know if the magnetic monopole
falls out and rolls across the floor and
you can't find it then the the task
can't be performed at all and if you can
find it it can only only be performed
once by that machine and there'll be a
maximum speed at which it can go and and
so on so that's the kind of thing it
would say it would it would be a sort of
de-universalization
of our fundamental understanding of the
universe
we tend to think when thinking about
more and more fundamental things that
the laws about fundamental things are
going to
not refer to specific objects like there
isn't just a law that applies to the
Eiffel Tower there are laws that apply
to iron structures and to structures
built in gravity and and uh so on so
that any truth about the physics or
engineering of the Eiffel Tower can be
expressed in terms that do not refer to
the Eiffel Tower
but that might be false and if it's
false then it would definitely mean that
there's no uh Universal Constructor
so if a universal Constructor is
possible to build then presumably people
are entities that can build them with
the requisite knowledge as you were kind
of alluding to so then why would a
person not be considered a universal
Constructor since every transformation
that a universal Constructor can cause a
person plus a universal Constructor
could also cause yes indeed well the
answer is
imperfection so
a Constructor is actually a limiting
case an unphysical limiting case of real
physical objects so there is no such
thing as a literally a Constructor for
converting hydrogen and oxygen into
water for example you can perform that
with 99 accuracy or 99.9 accuracy but
not with a hundred percent accuracy and
100 reliability there's always a
probability that some of it will escape
and so on and for any given machine that
can convert hydrogen and oxygen into
water imperfectly there's another
machine that one could build that could
build it less imperfectly but there is
no machine that could build it with
absolute perfection now you can regard a
human being
as a highly imperfect Universal
Constructor in that given enough
knowledge a person could build a
universal Constructor that's better than
itself and in fact that's the secret to
the to the proof and to the theory of
the universal Constructor as I see it
but the thing is
suppose you need
more memory than the brain has has
capacity for then unlike with a computer
it's not a trivial thing just oh well
we'll give it more memory with the
universal Constructor you'll have to say
oh well we'll have to tell it how to
make that memory
and so we would have to give them the
program be given the program for making
enough memory to do the task of a
universal Constructor and so on and then
once we're given all that massive amount
of information to do all that there
might not be time in a human lifetime
to do that so therefore we'd have to be
given a program that would extend human
lifetime and and so on so you see that
the the degree to which a human is a
universal Constructor
well it's it's rather a pickwickian
sense because it's so highly impractical
and would require so much knowledge that
we do not currently have that and if we
did have it we could do the universal
Constructor thing much more easily it's
for most purposes not
useful to consider humans as a universal
Constructor
or a human at any rate it could be that
humans as as a whole are there's also
the fact that neither a human nor the
set of all humans
is obedient a universal Constructor has
to be perfectly obedient and people and
collections of people are disobedient
and in fact disobedience is necessary
for their more important functionality
of explanatory universality
have you given any thought to what the
economic implications might be if and
when humans commodify the universal
Constructor
this has been studied by by many people
before I think people have had somewhat
the wrong idea of what a universal
Constructor will look like but it it
doesn't make any difference for thinking
about economic issues I think one thing
that many people may have got wrong is
that
the universal Constructor won't be as
sudden
a change like a singularity it won't be
a singularity because
although it is true that a universal
Constructor can be programmed to build
two more and each one of those can be
programmed to build two more and so on
first of all this will at first be done
rather inefficiently just as you know
the very first one will have to be built
by humans and the uh inefficiently and
so on and secondly the issue of
ownership
and value of raw materials does not go
away
once the issue of human effort
goes away the human effort will go away
apart from the effort of programming
Universal Constructors but that that's
non-trivial so people will be writing
programs in effect I mean that that
doesn't mean that they'll be doing the
same sort of thing as programmers to
today it's it's more like they'll be
doing the same sort of thing that
scientists and Engineers do today mostly
they make designs in a computer but then
there will still be the issues if you
want to convert I always give this
example if you want to convert Phobos
and demos into busts of Napoleon you
will run into a problem that someone
else wants to convert them into busts of
somebody else
and this issue we know how to resolve
issues like that it's it's with
ownership and private property and
capitalism and also a regulatory
framework that's based on the rule of
law and that kind of thing so we know
how to do that but it does mean that you
can't just design a thing and have it
built
it will still
cost something
and how do you make money in a society
with universal Constructors well you
make money the same way that Engineers
do today by programming computers
now how might a better understanding of
what is required to create a universal
Constructor improve our understanding of
the physics of thermodynamics and
information and I ask because I know
that Kiara marletto and vlotcovedral and
others have been doing some work with
respect to how Constructor Theory can
resolve some issues in both
thermodynamics and information and I
know you've done work with respect to
the Constructor theory of information as
well yes well I think Constructor Theory
can definitely help to provide deeper
foundations to thermodynamics
whether the universal Constructor will
is doubtful but what one can't really
tell until one has that theory and I'm
afraid the devil is in the detail here
whether I mean you know thermodynamics
is important even when you build a steam
engine and thermodynamics is important
if you build a wide variety of machines
and when they are built with universal
Constructors or with machines that are
made by machines that are made by
machines that are made by Universal
Constructors it will still be true that
thermodynamics plays a role but whether
the foundations of
the theory of universal Constructors
will have a role I don't know
you also wrote in your foundational
paper of Constructor theory that there
must be a smallest Universal Constructor
do you think it's going to be
interesting with respect to our
understanding of
nature and physics the exact size of the
smallest Universal Constructor or do you
think that's just going to be an
incidental detail
my present view is which has changed
somewhat from when I wrote that paper
my present view is is that it'll it'll
be more of an incidental detail I mean
it might be it might be cool it might be
an interesting curiosity rather like
asking what's the simplest possible
turing machine is a curiosity but it
doesn't help us with advancing either
the theory of computation or the
engineering of computers it might do one
day I mean it might come up and be
relevant but it doesn't look as though
it will be and I think the same is true
of universal Constructor I think the
reason I had a bit of a misconception
about that is that
I hadn't realized
at that time how much of a bottleneck
generating the knowledge to program a
universal Constructor will be
so say we find out one day that the
smallest Universal Constructor is made
of 37 atoms and that you provide those
with the bootstrap program which takes
on board other atoms from the
environment
um you know from empty space or or from
the ocean or something generic and it
makes a bigger Constructor which makes a
bigger and more powerful Constructor and
eventually gets um to a usable uh
Universal Constructor well the thing is
that your program for doing that will
always begin with that same preamble
it'll always begin with what this 37
atom thing must do to make a bigger
thing make a big thing and so on and the
important thing about the guts of the
program will be what happens after that
so you may as well start with that
Universal Constructor and have your
other ones make that rather than make
this make the smallest one
now David I want to Pivot to a more
sociological topic how has the research
environment changed since you began your
career and what might be done to resolve
any issues that have emerged since you
started working
yes well everybody
has a unique path through life and
through science and through the funding
system and so on and I I'm probably one
of the worst people to ask this question
because I decided quite some time ago to
leave the usual path and fortunately I
uh since I'm a theorist I don't have to
equip my own laboratory or anything like
that so it's a relatively easy for me to
work at home and to just use the
facilities of University and pick and
choose and not be paid and that kind of
thing so I can only tell you anecdotally
what it seems to me it seems to me that
the funding system and the career
structure for fundamental science
has
been in rather drastic decline during my
lifetime not that it was great when I
was a graduate student but there were
certain things that were that I have
noticed for example when I was a
graduate student I got an interview I I
was accepted I came to a research group
and on day one I was doing research and
it was research that I had discussed
with my supervisor and I did that
research and from time to time my
supervisor suggested that I go to a
course and which he thought would be
relevant to my research
and I never did and that that was my
experience of courses now that's pretty
much impossible first of all graduate
students are compelled to go to courses
and secondly the courses aren't chosen
by their supervisor because the
supervisor thinks it would be helpful
they're chosen by the department
because they think it fulfills some
Criterion that they have to meet to
their bosses or or whatever then a bit
later when one is a postdoc one applies
for research grants when I applied for a
research Grant I had to fill in a
form that was extremely short compared
to today's I mean it took maybe uh I
can't remember but maybe half an hour a
half a day sorry to to complete and then
I had to write an essay basically about
what I was going to do and why this was
interesting that's what the essay was
about I did not have to write additional
essays about what the impact of this
will be on the field and what the impact
of this will be on the economy of the
country and lots of impact things and
then not to mention lots of things that
are not relevant at all like for example
Outreach so the net effect of that is
that the post-doc type people that I
know
have to spend literally many weeks
filling out the equivalent of that form
and then
okay the next thing that I see again
maybe I've seen only an unrepresentative
subset of what is happening and it's all
much better than I think it is but
nobody has ever said to me that that is
so
when I complain
the the this application
instead of going to the person
who will be your boss or the person who
will be your collaborator or the
department which is running a project
along the lines that you want to do
research in instead of going to to
anyone who is actually connected with
what you will be doing it goes to a
committee
somewhere
whose task is to examine all such
applications
that are given funding entity usually a
government entity is going to fund so
the people there
are not connected with the particular
research they are not familiar with the
particular problem well of course they
aren't in fundamental research
you're more in renting new problems than
you are in solving or almost more anyway
than you are in solving them and and the
the group the research group that is
working on this knows about it but the
further away you get from that research
group the less the people know about it
and it's impossible for a committee
to decide such an issue so what they do
is they
fill out they construct generic sort of
questionnaire
with ticks that have to be filled in in
boxes and these questions in the
questionnaire because they are generic
they
cannot possibly relate to any particular
kind of research
so that means that the kind of research
that is funded is research that can be
justified by criteria that
would have Justified
previous research which is deemed to be
successful
and that can only ever be
incremental research because nobody can
determine from such a Criterion that a
new field or a new sub-branch of a field
is worth doing researching
and still less when it comes to the
boxes that are about what the impact is
going to be you you can't tell what the
impact of of research is going to be
until you actually know what the result
of your research is we were just talking
earlier about constructive theory and
the theory of the universal Constructor
and I was saying that I had certain
questions I couldn't really answer until
I know how the proof comes out
so those those are some of the things
that that I think are have gone terribly
wrong and which were not nowhere near
that wrong when I first entered the
professional physicist
how to fix them I really don't know I
mean I I know what the State of Affairs
I'm looking for is but I have
deliberately steered away from
from Administration but also in
particular from understanding how the
present administrative system works
I have a horror of it in fact
so I don't know how to fix it I just
know the attributes that a working
system would have
fair enough well David I appreciate all
of your insights with respect to the
universal Constructor and also the
admittedly
perhaps Bleak State of Affairs in
certain aspects of Academia but
fortunately all problems are soluble so
David thank you very much for your time
I appreciate it I was about to say that
yes thank you thank you bye -bye